---
title: Why I left nuclear engineering
author: Zhibeau
date: 2023-07-24 00:21:00 -0400
categories: [Personal,Career]
tags: [Career change]
---

Since high school, I have dreamt of studying computer science at the university level. I remember subscribing to "Computer Weekly" every week in high school, and I even applied for the "Computer Science and Engineering" major. However, life is full of serendipity. When it came time to choose a major for the college entrance examination, my mother, hearing about the demanding nature of a programmer's job and occasional news about overwork-related deaths, advised me to consider other fields. Coincidentally, I also had an interest in foreign languages and physics, so I enrolled in the Sino-French Institute of Nuclear Engineering and Technology (Fr: IFCEN), where I could study nuclear engineering using French as the medium.

During the undergraduate years at IFCEN, students primarily studies foundational mathematics, physics, and French, which were unrelated to nuclear engineering. I never really questioned whether I genuinely liked the field of nuclear engineering. In my final year, I also attempted to apply for computer science programs at French universities. Unfortunately, due to miscommunication about the requirements for recommended graduate admission, the dean of IFCEN mistakenly believed that I had already applied for the master's at IFCEN and refused to let me go to France. He even wrote a letter to the president of the French university, asking them to retract my offer. Consequently, I narrowly missed the opportunity to study computer science once again.

Due to the special education system in IFCEN, I was finally exposed to nuclear reactor engineering after starting my master's there. Before that, my imagination of nuclear engineering was like Oppenheimer's work: to study the structure of the atom and try to make use of its energy. However, the knowledge in this part has been mature for decades. Nuclear engineering today is to study how to boil water more efficiently. Thermohydaulics and mechanics are the main focus of nuclear researchers. But I am really not interested in these two fields.

On the other hand, I still held hope that I could find my passion within the field of nuclear engineering (other than nuclear reactor engineering). During my undergraduate studies, I helped a nuclear physics professor develop programs for automated data analysis and plotting, alleviating the tedious manual work. For my undergraduate thesis, I conducted molecular dynamics simulations and taught myself Python to analyze and visualize simulation data. In my master's program, I volunteered to assist a professor in nuclear medicine by developing a program that automatically analyzed and categorized cell experiment photos, counting cells. My master's research topic was also related to filtering algorithms, specifically using FPGA for signal processing in neutron detectors.

All of these experiences have allowed me to appreciate the charm of computer science and the sense of achievement and joy that comes from delving into research topics. I hoped to pursue a Ph.D. and entered a research group doing instrumentation and control for nuclear reactors. I thought I can do some research about the IT system for the nuclear power plant. However, after I start my Ph.D., my supervisor often tells me to "give full play to my knowledge in nuclear engineering". Even though I didn't have any research experience in reactor engineering, he told me that I was a graduate in nuclear and had courses in nuclear. Then I dived into this field and spent one year writing a survey paper. In the end, I realized if I continue with this Ph.D., I will be emerged in thermo-hydraulics. 

The journey of my two-year Ph.D. makes me ponder if I can find my interest in nuclear engineering (especially nuclear reactor engineering). Other than that I have no interest in thermohydraulic and mechanics at all. I want to leave this area for another two reasons: 
- 1. The nuclear power industry is really geographically restricted, you can only find nuclear jobs in specific areas around the world because there are not so many countries that have or willing to have nuclear power plants. In Canada, only Ontario and New Brunswick have nuclear plants. But I would love to experience life in different places. In addition, I prefer Québec to Ontario. 
- 2. Nuclear is an industry that does not have enough motivation for innovation. It is a security and stability-first industry. If something can run, you'd better not bother it. It is also a very mature industry, even for this moment there are some "innovative concepts" like molten salt reactors, small modular reactors, and fast reactors, these concepts have been there for decades. I would like to be involved in an industry with innovation every day because I am very willing to learn new things every day.
So, it is safe to say that I should really leave this industry. Because even if I get the degree and find an industrial or academic job in this field, I would not be happy at all. Working as an IT guy attracts me much much more.

Pursuing IT in nuclear during these years, it was like the transgenders trapped in a wrong body. It is time to become the one I really want to be.
